William Peter Hallett, (1811-1873):
Chief Scout and Leader of the “49th Rangers”
    William Peter Hallett was born about 1811 at Fort Vermilion, Alberta, the son of
Henry Hallett and Catherine Tenanse (the second of Henry Hallett’s four mixed-blood
wives). William was Henry’s eighth child. Reverend David Jones baptized William Peter
on October 18, 1824 after the Hallett family moved to the Red River Settlement and
established themselves at Point Douglas.

     William was a very interesting man whose various exploits were well documented in
numerous histories of Western Canada. He was highly intelligent; a natural leader of
men, and his prowess as a buffalo hunter was legend. He was an opponent of Riel during
the 1869-1870 Red River Resistance and a leader of the “49th Rangers,” the Metis guards
and scouts of the International Boundary Commission (1872-1873).

     In 1872 the formal survey of the border between Canada and the United States
began. Commissioner Donald R. Cameron chose William Hallett as Chief Scout to recruit
a group to protect the British contingent from Sioux Indians or anyone else who might try
to molest them. Captain Donald Campbell of the Royal Artillery had used Hallett as a
guide when he accompanied the putative Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba, William
McDougall to Manitoba in 1869 in an abortive attempt to take over the settlement
without negotiation with the residents.

The boundary Commission scouts provided their own horses and were provided with
Spencer carbines. They were intended to act as guides, hunters and herdsmen. The budget
was £4000 per year for the thirty men who were recruited. Hallett assigned Adam
McDonald as deputy commander and Francois Gosselin, Guillaume Lafournaise and
William Gaddy as sub-leaders. Hallett’s nephew, William Pruden, was also a member of
the Rangers. D’Arcy East took over with Crompton as deputy when Hallett died in the
winter of 1873.

The newspapers of the day were quite supportive of the use of Metis interpreters and
scouts:

                                       INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARY
                                             COMMISSION1



1
  It took four separate treaties to establish the U.S.-Canadian border. The Treaty of Paris of 1783 ended the American Revolution and
established boundaries between the U.S. and colonies of British North America. The boundary consisted of 17 segments, and extended
only as far west as the Lake of the Woods. The Treaty of 1818 established the boundary from the northwest corner of the Lake of the
Woods south to the 49th Parallel, thence west for 853 miles to the Rockies. The Anglo-Russian Treaty of 1825, between Russia and
Great Britain, established an ambiguous 1,476-mile boundary between Canada and Russian America (Alaska), including the southern
panhandle and north along the 141st Meridian. In 1846 the Oregon Treaty divided Oregon Country between British North America
and the U.S. by extending the 49th Parallel to the Pacific Coast (From American Surveyor Magazine, Marc Cheves, July 1, 2006).




                                                                                                                                  1
We understand that the English Boundary Commission
have been in communication with Mr. Wm. Hallett, of this
place, in relation to the raising of a number of Half-Breeds
to go across the plains with the expedition. Their services
would, probably, be required as guides, interpreters and
scouts. Before reaching the Pacific, and finally locating the
International Boundary line to that point, it is surmised that
from two to three years may elapse, and persons going with
the Commissioners are to be engaged for some such
lengthened period of service. A force of between one
hundred and two hundred men accompanies the expedition,
as all may not be plain sailing across the plains. The
presence of such a force, well kept in hand, will no doubt
have a good effect on the tribes through whom they may
pass. But more potent still will be the presence of men
such as William Hallet, John Grant, George Flett, or some
of the Leveilles, Delormes, or Gentons, who know every
inch of the ground between this and the mountains, can
converse with the Indians in their naïve Tongue, and are
thoroughly conversant with their habits. Men like these we
have named, and others we could name, will do more
towards carrying such an expedition safely through, than all
the troops that will accompany it; and for the sake of the
speedy settlement of this boundary line dispute, we hope
that an important point like the engagement of men familiar
with Indian life and character, to navigate over the plains,
will not be neglected.

       Manitoban and Northwest Herald, January 18, 1873


                The Boundary Survey
  The English Boundary Commissioner, Capt. Cameron,
has engaged some thirty English and French Half-Breeds to
go with the Boundary Commission, which is expected to
start on the 25th inst. These men will be on horseback and
under the leadership of Mr. William Hallett, who will, we
are sure, prove most efficient in anything he undertakes.
The party are under engagement for five months, about
which time the Commission will probably be seeking its
winter quarters.
  The Commission will, necessarily, travel very slow, not
making, in all probability, more than about 300 miles
during the season.




                                                                 2
                      Manitoban and Northwest Herald, May 17, 1873

    William’s his first serious love (in 1834) was Sophia McDonell, the orphaned
daughter of deceased Chief Factor Allan McDonell. However, her guardian, Alexander
Christie, Governor of Assiniboia, didn’t think William was good enough for her, because
Hallett was of mixed-blood and a buffalo hunter. Christie gave her hand to the son of a
Selkirk Settler, John Livingstone. This caused a furor in the Metis community, as it was
another example of the HBC’s arbitrary control over the residents of Rupert’s Land.

     William was first married “a la façon du pays” in 1835 to Suzette Lunes. She died in
1840 and he then married Maria Pruden in 1841, at St. Andrews Anglican Church at “the
rapids” below Winnipeg. Maria was the daughter of chief factor John Peter Pruden and
Nancy Pruden, born at Carlton House in 1813. The young couple lived in his father’s
household until 1844. When Henry Hallett died in 1844, William and Maria had two
children. Since he no longer had to consider his father’s wishes, he and his brother James
began independent fur trading with the Indians, at the time, a practice which was
outlawed by the HBC.

    It is no exaggeration to say that William Hallett was a very prominent citizen of Red
River. An article in the Nor’Wester newspaper on June 20, 1863 said:

        …the veteran chieftain of a hundred battles… Mr. Hallett is one of the first men
    in this country; he is universally beloved and esteemed; he has extensive and
    powerful connections among all classes; of a mild and peaceful disposition himself,
    he has ever exerted himself to preserve peace and order in this country; as against the
    Indian tribes around us his very name is a tower of strength.

     Hallett was one of the elected leaders of the Hunt. Alexander Ross in the Red River
Settlement (p.246) describes Hallett’s duties as one of the ten elected “Captains of the
Hunt.”

         On leaving the river Chienne, Parisien,…. Got into the dumps, and forked off to
    take a road of his own, contrary to the regulations of the camp, when Hallett, one of
    the captains, rode after him, and with a crack or two of his whip, turning his horses,
    brought them back to camp.

    During the 1860s, William was still the elected leader of the English-speaking Half-
Breed buffalo hunt out of the Red River.

    William Hallett was in favour of bringing Red River into confederation, and on this,
he and Riel clashed unreservedly. In July of 1869, William was signatory to a Nor’Wester
advertizement calling for a meeting to deal with the Canadian intentions of annexing
Rupert’s Land. In 1869, he worked as a guide and interpreter for one of the John Dennis
survey parties. He then helped Dennis, serving as a guide to evade the patrols of Riel’s
men between Fort Garry and Pembina. He was also hired to guide the “would be”
Lieutenant Governor MacDougall when he was trying to cross the border into Manitoba



                                                                                         3
to take up his duties at Red River. When the party was stopped at La Rivière Salle
William was held in custody then released. He was finally arrested and jailed at Fort
Garry on December 7, 1869. His only son John was also imprisoned at this time when he
went as part of as delegation to negotiate with Riel. Riel released William on $450 bail
on February 12, 1870.

     In 1872, when the border between Canada was being formally surveyed, it was
decided that the survey party needed protection from the Sioux and anyone else who
might try to molest them. Captain Cameron immediately chose William Hallett to
command and recruit a troop of native Manitobans to form what became known as the
“49th Rangers.” In his final report, Commissioner Cameron penned a tribute to the
memory of Chief Scout Hallett:

         The Corps of mounted scouts was composed, with few exceptions, of Half-
    Breeds. They provided their own riding horses; they were furnished with camping
    equipage, blanket, robes, arms, and ammunition.
         They were employed in reconnoitering, hunting, herding, maintaining
    connections with depots, carrying letters, and in communicating with Indians.
         The scouts employed in 1873 were engaged and commanded by Mr. William
    Hallett (since dead), of whom it is right to say that very few could be named who
    have so great a claim upon their county’s memory.
         Distinguished by honest manliness, renowned for activity and great power of
    endurance, and noted from his youth as a most successful and daring hunter, and for
    his bravery when in contact with hostile Indians, he commanded the friendship and
    respect of all his brother Half-Breeds, and was latterly elected chief of the English
    speaking section.

     William Hallett died of a gunshot wound to the stomach, by his own hand on
December 27, 1873. William had undoubtedly lived with great pain as a result of his
imprisonment in 1869-70. The irons used to bind his legs and arms in the unheated jail
had frozen the flesh and resulted in a chronic and incurable streptococcus infection
(erysipelas). Descendant Granny Good stated in her later years “His legs were raw with
erysipelas. …and Hallett wished he were dead the pain was so bad.” James McKay of
Deer Lodge was a staunch friend, colleague and supporter of William Hallett. When he
heard of his death, he sat down and sobbed, “He was my Best Man.” Maria Pruden
Hallett died on December 24, 1883, three days short of the tenth anniversary of her
husband’s death.
     The newspaper gave the following account of his death:

                                       Suicide
                             Sad End of an Old Resident

                   This morning, at about 10 o’clock Mr. William Hallett,
              of St. James Parish, came to his death at his own hands. We
              have not been able to gather the full particulars, but it
              appears the deceased had in some manner shot himself in


                                                                                       4
              the abdomen with a fowling piece. Mr. Hallett was in the
              neighborhood of sixty years of age, and was highly
              respected by a large circle of acquaintances. Of late some
              pecuniary losses seemed to weigh on his mind, and friends
              began to notice the fire of insanity in his eye, and there can
              be no doubt that his reason had departed ere he committed
              the rash act which hurried him before his maker.

                             Manitoba Free Press, December 27, 1873




Compiled by Lawrence Barkwell
Coordinator of Metis Heritage and History Research
Louis Riel Institute
Heather Hallett made substantial contributions.

Reference:
Heather Hallett. Children of the Rivers. Castelgar, B.C.: Author, 1999: 221-250




                                                                                  5
